Shaping change
Those who leave behind the current state of the art, the certified canon
of knowledge, will find it easier to generate innovations and
play a role in shaping the future—such, at any rate, is the view of mobility
researcher Prof. Dr. Andreas Knie, head of the Science Policy Studies
Research Group at the WZB Berlin Social Science Center and Director of
Innovation Center for Mobility and Change. An interjection.
The insight that the world is in transition is at least as old as
the world itself. Yet the notion surprises us again and again. In
September 2015, for example, Uber Technologies Inc., which had
been founded in 2009, was valued at just over 54 billion US
dollars. This made it more valuable than Volkswagen,
the world’s
second-largest carmaker at the time. The share price would
dip back to more reasonable levels within a few days.
But the point had been made: Stock markets place a higher
value on future potential than the economic strength achieved
so far. They reward
something that came to be known as the
“California way“. With Apple, Google, Amazon and Facebook,
four of the six most highly valued companies in the world deal
directly or indirectly
with digital platforms and their economy.
And they’re all based in California.
seems to me to be rooted in the way of thinking.
The state of the art in terms of technology is less
important when it comes to the California way.
A new idea is primarily judged based on whether the
people who are supposed to spend money on it
actually like it. If that is the case, then it is developed
and tested pragmatically without paying much
heed to expert opinion. The crucial factor in this model
is the attractiveness of a product for the immediate
target. That this is all too often associated
with the shortcomings of an immature technology is
not considered overly important. This is, for good
reason, quite different in the professional cultures of
companies that have grown over decades. In Germany,
a predominant state of technology has developed
that continuously evolves in a discursive process
involving technical specialists working jointly. The
peers—these technical specialists—decide whether
a new idea will be pursued or dropped. The result
is a system that offers high quality and an astonishing
innovation density in all details; at the same time,
such a system is also characterized by a high degree
of path dependence.
It’s time to rethink the predominant professional
culture. The objective is to completely reinvent
oneself in order to find a comprehensive and
sustainable path—not a European or Californian
path, but one that is suitable for the whole world.
Is this system still the right answer in an age of digital
revolution? This is the absolutely critical question
in the face of radical changes. The perfect example of
this is the smartphone. The idea originally came
from Nokia, and IBM, Ericsson and Blackberry all tried
their hands in this development field between 1996
and 2002, but Steve Jobs was the first to recognize its
true potential. The iPhone began its victory march
in 2007, and today—just ten years later—almost all of
us use a smartphone in both our professional and
private everyday lives. For the young generation, it has
meanwhile become the primary perceptual filter.
Everything
that is not usable digitally seems quite
simply not to be taking place.
In the past, for example, the selection of a form
of transportation was made on the basis of physical
properties and of course brand loyalties as well.
The contact was more direct, the experience was
more tangible and immediate. These worlds of
experience also structured the hierarchy of the transport
market. But generations Y and Z seem to be
setting other priorities. What is decisive for them is
no longer the technical configuration of a device
and its exclusive quality, but rather one solitary
quality: Is this option available right here, right now?
Digital platforms are transforming the world of
things and services into goods that are available at
any time and any place. Whoever organizes these
platforms will dominate the world of devices as well.
And that is exactly the reason why the stock markets
pay such close attention to the developers and
operators of these platforms. There’s no denying it:
The world is changing. Once again.
That’s nothing for anyone to be afraid of, because
what seems so new to us in the California way
is actually long known to us. “Out-of-the-box” thinking,
leaving the strictures of communities and
established paths behind, granting space to passionate
outsiders,
turning talents into entrepreneurs—
we know all about that in Europe as well. One example
is a young man from Bohemia who at the tender
age of 17 and against the expressed will of his father
brought electricity to the family home, or who as
a young adult developed a hybrid drive system. His
name: Ferdinand Porsche. If it had been left to
society to decide his future, he would have taken
over the family tinsmith. But instead he dedicated
himself to living out his dream, attending evening
courses for electrical engineering at the K.u.K.
Staatsgewerbeschule,
the state-run trade school,
in nearby Reichenberg.
The Europe in which the talented engineer and inventor
was born is naturally a different place today,
and Reichenberg is now Liberec, yet the challenges
are still similar. We have an unprecedented level
of economic well-being and a degree of stability that
leads to stagnation and complacency. That’s why
it’s time for us to take another look at the predominant
professional culture and use the resources that society
puts at our disposal more productively as we work
together on the projects of the future. To shape this
change in an active way, a clear-eyed view of California
is in order. After all, what’s happening
there is in
essence a repetition of a history that we already know.
With this consciousness, we will be able to reinvent
ourselves and embark on an all-encompassing and
sustainable path—not a European
or Californian way,
but a way that’s suitable for the entire world.
